docs: add spline documentation (#575)
motion-canvas/motion-canvas: packages/docs/docs/components/spline.mdx

---

> sidebar_position: 4

Reviewer: I think custom components should be the last thing on the menu

slug: /spline
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Spline

```tsx editor
import {makeScene2D} from '@motion-canvas/2d/lib/scenes';
import {Spline, Knot} from '@motion-canvas/2d/lib/components';
import {createRef} from '@motion-canvas/core/lib/utils';
import {waitFor} from '@motion-canvas/core/lib/flow';

export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  const spline = createRef<Spline>();

  view.add(
    <Spline ref={spline} lineWidth={4} fill={'#e13238'} closed>
      <Knot position={[-120, -30]} startHandle={[0, 70]} />
      <Knot
        position={[0, -50]}
        startHandle={[-40, -60]}
        endHandle={[40, -60]}
      />
      <Knot position={[120, -30]} startHandle={[0, -70]} />
      <Knot position={[0, 100]} startHandle={[5, 0]} />
    </Spline>,
  );

  yield* spline().scale(0.9, 0.6).to(1, 0.4);
});
```

> The `Spline` component allows us to draw and animate smooth curves through a

Reviewer: There should be a link to the corresponding API docs at least in the first mention of the node.

```

#### Broken knots

Providing both `startHandle` and `endHandle` results in a so-called **broken
knot**. Broken knots are very useful because they allow us to add sharp corners
to our spline.

```tsx editor
export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  view.add(
    <Spline lineWidth={16} stroke={'lightseagreen'} closed>
      <Knot position={[-50, -80]} startHandle={[0, 20]} endHandle={[90, 0]} />
      <Knot position={[50, 0]} />
      <Knot position={[-50, 80]} startHandle={[90, 0]} endHandle={[0, -20]} />
    </Spline>,
  );
});
```

#### Blending between user handles and calculated handles

By default, the auto-calculated handles get ignored when at least one of the
`startHandle` or `endHandle` properties is provided. However, it is possible to
blend between user-provided and auto-calculated handles by using the `auto`
property.

```tsx {6,13}
<Spline lineWidth={16} stroke={'lightseagreen'} closed>
  <Knot
    position={[-50, -80]}
    startHandle={[0, 20]}
    endHandle={[90, 0]}
    auto={0.5}
  />
  <Knot position={[50, 0]} />
  <Knot
    position={[-50, 80]}
    startHandle={[90, 0]}
    endHandle={[0, -20]}
    auto={0.5}
  />
</Spline>
```

> `auto` should be a value between `0` and `1` and represents the percentage of
> how much to blend between the user-provided handles and auto-calculated handles.
> A value of `1` means to use the auto handles while a value of `0` means using
> the user handles.

Reviewer: I think this could be simplified to:
```suggestion
`auto` should be a value between `0` and `1` and represents the percentage of
how much to blend between the user-provided handles (`0`) and auto-calculated handles (`1`).
```

:::tip

`auto` is a compound signal, which means you can specify `startHandleAuto` and
`endHandleAuto` to individually control the blend of each handle.

```tsx {5-6}
<Knot
  position={[0, 0]}
  startHandle={[-50, -50]}
  endHandle={[30, 0]}
  startHandleAuto={0.3}
  endHandleAuto={0.8}
/>
```

:::

Since `auto` is a signal, it can also be animated.

```tsx editor
export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  const knots: Knot[] = [];

  view.add(

>     <Spline lineWidth={16} stroke={'lightseagreen'} closed>

Reviewer: Should also have `lineJoin={'round'}` to prevent the quick transition from a broken handle to auto

percentage of the spline's arclength from which to start drawing from.

```tsx {7-8}
<Spline
  points={[
    [-300, 0],
    [-150, -100],
    [150, 100],
  ]}
  start={0.4}
  end={0.8}
/>
```

The example above would draw the spline starting at 40% of the spline's
arclength (`start={0.4}`) and draw it up until 80% of the spline's arclength
(`end={0.8}`).

:::note

When using `start` and `end` in conjunction with `startOffset` and `endOffset`,
`start` and `end` will be relative to the _remaining_ length of the spline after
taking the offset into account.

:::

We can then animate drawing a spline by tweening these properties:

```tsx editor
export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  const spline = createRef<Spline>();

  view.add(
    <Spline
      ref={spline}
      lineWidth={6}
      stroke={'lightseagreen'}
      points={[
        [-300, 0],
        [-150, -100],
        [150, 100],
        [300, 0],
      ]}
      end={0}
    />,
  );

  yield* spline().end(1, 1.5);
  yield* spline().start(1, 1.5).to(0.5, 1);
  yield* spline().end(0.5, 1);
  yield* all(spline().start(0, 1.5), spline().end(1, 1.5));
});
```

### Animating the knots of a spline

> Since the `Knot` node is a regular Motion Canvas component, it can be animated
> in much the same way as other components.

Reviewer: Could be just:
```suggestion
`Knot`s can be animated in the same way as other nodes in Motion Canvas.
```

:::note

Animating a spline's knots is only possible when using the

> [Knot](#using-knot-nodes) component, not when using the `points` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`Knot`](#using-knot-nodes) component, not when using the `points` property.
```

:::

Below are a few examples of interesting effects that can be achieved by
animating different properties of knots.

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value='position' label='Position' default>

```tsx editor
export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  const knotPositions: PossibleVector2[] = [
    [-200, 0],
    [-100, -80],
    [0, 80],
    [100, -80],
    [200, 0],
  ];
  const knots: Knot[] = [];

  view.add(
    <Spline lineWidth={6} stroke={'lightseagreen'}>
      {knotPositions.map((pos, i) => (
        <Knot ref={makeRef(knots, i)} position={pos} />
      ))}
    </Spline>,
  );

  yield* all(
    knots[1].position.y(80, 1).to(-80, 1),
    knots[2].position.y(-80, 1).to(80, 1),
    knots[3].position.y(80, 1).to(-80, 1),
  );
});
```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="rotation" label="Rotation">

Since `startHandle` and `endHandle` are relative to the knot, rotating the knot
will also change the handle positions.

:::caution

Note that animating a knot's `rotation` is only possible if its `auto` value is
less than `1`.

> :::

Reviewer: This information should be hoisted outside of the tabs since it applies to transform in general.
You could say:
```
You can think of `startHandle` and `endHandle` as being the children of the Knot -
changing the knot's position, rotation and scale will also transform the handles.
The only exceptions are `auto` handles which are unaffected by these transformations.
```

```tsx editor
export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  const knot = createRef<Knot>();

  view.add(
    <Spline lineWidth={6} stroke={'lightseagreen'}>
      <Knot position={[-100, 30]} />
      <Knot ref={knot} position={[0, -50]} startHandle={[-70, 0]} />
      <Knot position={[100, 30]} />
    </Spline>,
  );

  yield* knot().rotation(360, 3, linear).to(0, 3);
});
```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="scale" label="Scale">

Since `startHandle` and `endHandle` are relative to the knot, scaling the knot
will also change the handle positions.

:::caution

Note that animating a knot's `scale` is only possible if its `auto` value is
less than `1`.

:::

```tsx editor
export default makeScene2D(function* (view) {
  const knot = createRef<Knot>();

  view.add(
    <Spline lineWidth={6} stroke={'lightseagreen'}>
      <Knot position={[-100, 30]} />
      <Knot ref={knot} position={[0, -50]} startHandle={[-70, 0]} />
      <Knot position={[100, 30]} />
    </Spline>,
  );

  yield* knot().scale(3, 2).to(0.2, 2).to(1, 1);
});
```

  </TabItem>

</Tabs>

### Animating objects along a spline

> Splines are often used to animate objects along a path. The same is possible in
> Motion Canvas by using the `getPointAtPercentage` method of the `Spline`
> component.

Reviewer: Just a suggestion but I'd reword this as:
```suggestion
Splines can be useful to model the path that an object should follow.
You can use the `getPointAtPercentage` method to achieve this.
```
I think it's a bit clearer since Splines don't do the animating and the current sentence kinda reads like that: "Splines are often used to animate objects [...]"

      <Knot position={[50, 0]} />
      <Knot position={[-50, 80]} startHandle={[90, 0]} endHandle={[0, -20]} />
    </Spline>,
  );
});
```

#### Blending between user handles and calculated handles

By default, the auto-calculated handles get ignored when at least one of the
`startHandle` or `endHandle` properties is provided. However, it is possible to
blend between user-provided and auto-calculated handles by using the `auto`
property.

```tsx {6,13}
<Spline lineWidth={16} stroke={'lightseagreen'} closed>
  <Knot
    position={[-50, -80]}
    startHandle={[0, 20]}
    endHandle={[90, 0]}
    auto={0.5}
  />
  <Knot position={[50, 0]} />
  <Knot
    position={[-50, 80]}
    startHandle={[90, 0]}
    endHandle={[0, -20]}
    auto={0.5}
  />
</Spline>
```

`auto` should be a value between `0` and `1` and represents the percentage of
how much to blend between the user-provided handles and auto-calculated handles.
A value of `1` means to use the auto handles while a value of `0` means using
the user handles.

:::tip

`auto` is a compound signal which means you can also specify `startHandleAuto`
and `endHandleAuto` respectively to control the blend of each handle

> individually.

Reviewer 2: `auto` is a compound signal, which means you can specify `startHandleAuto` and `endHandleAuto` to individually control the blend of each handle.
